JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Pope
Francis' first full day in
Washington. Thousands turn out
to try to get a glimpse as he
tours the nation's capital.
And on the eve of the pontiff's
address to Congress, Gwen's
interview with the chaplain
of the House of Representatives.
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY, Chaplain
of the House of Representatives:
I think it's been noticeable
with Pope Francis that, when he
says things, it's like people
are like, for the first time
say, geez, I can understand this
guy. I understand what he's
saying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday: Migrants continue to
flood into Greece, as
European leaders meet in
Brussels to try to agree on a
unified response.
And remembering the plays and
phrases, of baseball great Yogi
Berra.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS "NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Washington went
from a full-time focus on
politics and government today to
a full-time focus
on Pope Francis.
William Brangham reports on this
first full day of the pope's
first visit to the United
States.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The South Lawn
of the White House was a sea of
expectant faces this morning,
as more than 11,000 turned out
to witness the sights and the
sounds of a full White
House welcome.
The pomp and circumstance
contrasted with the pontiff's
own modest arrival in a small
gray Fiat. He was greeted by the
president and first lady and by
the cheering throng.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Holy Father, on
behalf of Michelle and myself,
welcome to the White House.
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: I should explain
that our backyard is not
typically this crowded.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: But the size and
the spirit of today's gathering
is just a small reflection
of the deep devotion of some
70 million American Catholics.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Obama used the occasion to
commend Pope Francis for his
calls
to action on several fronts, in
the president's words -- quote
-- "shaking us out of
complacency."
BARACK OBAMA: You remind us that
the lord's most powerful message
is mercy. That means
welcoming the stranger with
empathy and a truly open heart,
from the refugee who flees
war-torn lands, to the immigrant
who leaves home in search of a
better life.
And, Holy Father, you remind us
that we have a sacred obligation
to protect our planet,
God's magnificent gift to us.
(APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The president
also thanked the pope for
assisting the diplomatic thaw
between the U.S. and Cuba.
Francis then delivered his own
message in a soft voice and
halting
English, most notably on the
challenge of a warming planet.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church: Accepting the urgency,
it seems clear to me also that
climate change is a problem
which can no longer be left to a
future generation.
(APPLAUSE)
POPE FRANCIS: When it comes to
the care of our common home, we
are living at a critical
moment of history.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That appeal
seemed sure to please the
political left, but the pope
took a conservative tack, too,
reaffirming that Roman Catholics
want their belief in
traditional marriage respected.
POPE FRANCIS: With countless
other people of goodwill, they
are likewise concerned that
efforts to build a just and
wisely ordered society respect
their deepest concerns and
the right to religious liberty.
(APPLAUSE)
POPE FRANCIS: That freedom
reminds one of America's most
precious possessions.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The pope and
president then moved inside for
a closed door 40-minute meeting
in the Oval Office. And from
there, Francis moved on to a
parade in his honor. In his
signature Popemobile, he
traveled along the National Mall
and was greeted by thousands
of screaming supporters.
At one point, a young girl ran
through security barricades, the
motorcade stopped, and, at
the pope's urging, Secret
Service agents brought the child
to him. After that, it was on to
St. Matthew's Cathedral to
meet with American bishops.
Francis led a prayer service,
and under a mosaic of Saint
Matthew, he spoke in Italian
of the need for the American
church to emerge from its
long-running sexual abuse
scandal.
POPE FRANCIS (through
translator): I realize how much
the pain of recent years has
weighed
upon you, and I have supported
your generous commitment to
bring healing to victims, in
the knowledge that, in healing,
we too are healed and to work to
ensure that such crimes
will never be repeated.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All this was
preamble for the main event of
the papal day, a canonization
mass held at the National Shrine
of the Immaculate Conception.
Some 25,000 people poured onto
the grounds to hear the pope's
words:
POPE FRANCIS (through
translator): We are heirs to a
bold missionary spirit of so
many
men and women who preferred not
to be shut up within structures
which give us a false
sense of security, within habits
which make us feel safe, while
at our door people are
starving. We are indebted to a
tradition, a chain of witnesses
who have made it possible
for the good news of the Gospel
to be in every generation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As part of the
service, the pope conferred
sainthood on Junipero Serra,
a Franciscan friar from Spain
who brought Catholicism to
California in the 1700s. It
marked the first canonization
held on U.S. soil.
But the move has not been met
with universal praise. American
Indian groups and others
argue that Serra helped wipe out
indigenous populations and
enslaved converts.
The mass capped off the pope's
first full day in Washington.
Tomorrow, he will address
a joint meeting of Congress
before going on to New York and
Philadelphia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, for more, I
spoke with William a short time
ago during that mass
at the National Shrine of
the Immaculate Conception.
So, William, you have watched
the pope arrive for this mass.
What have you seen?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hi, Judy.
It's just been a tremendous
response that the pope has been
getting here. We have been
at the National Shrine for the
last several hours. Incredible
security to get through
here. And most of the families
that we met have been waiting
here since 9:00, 10:00,
11:00 this morning to get in,
but everyone seemed to be in
very good spirits. They were
thrilled to see the
pope up close.
And when he came in at about
5:00 tonight, he drove his
Popemobile right through the
middle of the crowd. And it was
an interesting reaction. The
group that are in the seated
section, sort of closer to the
Basilica itself, offered very
polite, muted applause for him.
The crowd in the standing-room
area went absolutely wild for
him, just enthusiastic,
erupting,
cheering, waving, and just a
really tremendous reaction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it seems
that he's the one who's enjoying
this a lot as well. I saw
him this morning reaching out,
shaking hands, a big smile on
his face. Then, this afternoon,
he asked the security people to
bring children over to him, so
he could kiss them while he
was in the Popemobile,
downtown Washington.
It's very much a
two-way street here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I think that's
right. I mean, I think he
obviously feeds off of the
reaction. He's known as this
pope who just wants to have
impromptu meetings with people
and very much loves the
serendipity of those moments.
Obviously, that poses great
complications
for people who are trying to
protect him and to keep him on
schedule. But we saw a little
bit of that as he came through.
I mean, I think, obviously, this
is a 78-year-old man. He's a
little tired. He wasn't -- I
think,
by the end of the day today, he
was a little bit tired. It felt
like most of his mass tonight
also was a very subdued affair.
But, clearly, he's getting some
energy from the crowds here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally,
William, about this canonization
of a Spanish missionary
in California. It's something
that's been pretty
controversial. Tell us about
this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, Junipero
Serra is the man who's now the
most recent Catholic
saint added to the
pantheon of saints.
And he is beloved by Catholics
for being an incredible
evangelist. He came up from
Mexico
and California in the 1700s and
converted and evangelized to a
lot of indigenous people
who were living there at the
time. Now, of course, conversion
and evangelization is one
thing when you're looking at it
from the Catholic perspective.
When you're looking at it from
the Native American perspective,
that can seem like a
very different interaction. And
he had been criticized by
indigenous groups for Serra's
very rough treatment of these
people. So, the pope has endured
some controversy. And
in the past, the pope has
apologized for the sins of
colonization, as he says it.
But he still believes that
Serra's mission is a powerful
one and one he wants to hold
up to the entire Catholic world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
William Brangham following Pope
Francis as he conducts a mass
here in Washington,
thank you, William.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news, the head of the
German automaker Volkswagen
is out, amid a scandal over
rigging diesel cars to pass
pollution tests. CEO Martin
Winterkorn
announced today
he's stepping down.
He denied any personal
wrongdoing, but in a statement,
said -- quote -- "Volkswagen
needs a fresh start. I am
clearing the way for this fresh
start with my resignation."
Germany's economy minister
warned today against assuming
the scandal will do lasting harm
to V.W. or to the
German economy.
In Egypt, two imprisoned
Al-Jazeera journalists received
presidential pardons in a case
that's
drawn international attention.
Hours later, Canadian Mohamed
Fahmy and Egyptian national
Baher Mohamed, joined by their
wives, were released in Cairo.
They had been arrested
in December 2013 and convicted
of reporting what the government
called false news.
MOHAMED FAHMY, Journalist: Where
are we going to start? I don't
know. What are we going
to do? We're going to travel the
world. We're going to celebrate.
We're going to party and,
you know, we just really hope
that this is -- our families
have suffered so much since
the beginning of this trial, and
we're very happy that President
Sisi took this action
and released us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A third
Al-Jazeera journalist had
already been deported.
The coup in the West African
nation of Burkina Faso is
apparently over, after just one
week.
The interim president of the
country announced today he's
returned to power. He had the
backing
of the military, which opposed
the coup by members of the
presidential guard. Burkina
Faso is supposed to hold
elections next month.
Chinese President Xi Jinping
turned his attention to doing
business today on the first leg
of
his visit to the U.S. It is Xi's
tour of a Boeing plant near
Seattle, and it coincided
with news that Chinese firms
will buy 300 aircraft. And he
spoke of broader cooperation
with the U.S.
XI JINPING, Chinese President
(through translator): In the
last 36 years, since China and
the
United States established
diplomatic relations, our
relationship has been forging
forward.
I intend to have in-depth
exchange of views with President
Obama and other American leaders
to make sure that this
relationship will deliver more
tangible benefits to people in
our two
countries and elsewhere
in the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a Seattle
speech last night, Xi also said
that the U.S. and China can work
together to address
cyber-crimes.
U.S. officials have strongly
suggested China was behind a
huge breach of federal personnel
records. Now it turns out the
hackers stole 5.6 million
fingerprint images. That number,
from the Office of Personnel
Management, is five times more
than first reported. The images
were part of applications for
federal security clearances.
President Obama is voicing
doubts that a U.N. summit in
Paris this year will do enough
to
cut carbon emissions. In
"Rolling Stone" magazine's
latest cover story, he says --
quote -- "Whatever
various country targets are,
it's still going to fall short
of what the science requires."
Even so, the president says he
hopes for aggressive enough
targets.
Wall Street had another down
day, driven by falling oil
prices and weak factory data.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 50 points to below 16280.
The Nasdaq fell four points.
And the S&P 500
also dropped four.
And today marked the high point
of the hajj, the annual
pilgrimage of Muslims to Mecca.
Some two million people made
their way to Mount Arafat
outside the city for a day of
prayer and repentance. Many held
umbrellas to shield against the
sun.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
an emergency meeting of Europe's
leaders to address the
refugee crisis; can the U.S.
government avoid a shutdown next
week?; plus, the priest who
oversees one-half of Congress on
the pope's speech at the
Capitol, and much more.
More than 2, 5,000 refugees
arrived on the Greek island of
Lesbos today, representing
a sharp spike in arrivals on the
island. In Brussels, European
Union leaders held tense
discussions. They are split on
the continent's response to the
unfolding crisis.
Hari Sreenivasan has more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Those tense
discussions have centered on how
many refugees will be
resettled across the 28
countries of the European Union,
and who will pay for them.
But, as ministers talked in
Brussels, the arrivals of
refugees and migrants continued
in Athens, which is where
special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant is tonight.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The typical day
on the migrant trail: the
arrival at Athens' main port of
a ferry from Lesbos, the island
where most asylum seekers enter
Greece.
Just one ship disgorges some
2,000 people. Sometimes, there
are three ferries a day,
a fraction of the problem being
discussed by European leaders
who met in Brussels today.
Many have not eaten during the
15-hour voyage, and storm a
feeding station set up by a
group
of Muslims from
Northern England.
This crisis is undermining the
two-decade experiment of a
united Europe, as prime
ministers
and presidents fight over how to
respond to the influx.
Meanwhile, ordinary citizens are
doing what they can, in this
case trying to provide more than
1,000 meals a day.
MAN: Obviously, life -- life as
they know it doesn't exist
anymore. If I knew what Europe
could do, I wouldn't be here.
All I know is these people, they
are homeless. They're foodless.
Whatever we can do to help them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Similar chaotic
scenes play out in Athens'
Victoria Square, where hungry
migrant children fight to grab a
milk carton from a charity
bundle delivered by a Greek.
This square is a staging post
for those at the wrong end of
the refugee class system
devised by Europe. Priority has
been given to Syrians, Eritreans
and Iraqis, but many
of those in Victoria are from
Central Asia, and the Afghans
especially wonder why the
continuing conflict in their
country is not considered as
perilous.
MAN: You know better. In
Afghanistan, there's a war,
Taliban, Da'esh, because people
don't
war. People want peace.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But, in
Brussels, the argument is over
the present and a plan to
distribute
120,000 refugees by quotas
across the 28 members of the
European Union.
European Council
President Donald Tusk:
DONALD TUSK, European Council
President: We have now reached a
critical point where we
need to end this cycle of mutual
recriminations and
misunderstandings. Today, our
debate must
be based on facts, not
illusions and to emotions.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Heads of states
convened this evening to discuss
financial assistance
to help with the refugees both
in Europe and in the Middle
East. But the main debate was
on the quota deal, voted through
by a majority of European
interior ministers yesterday.
It came over the loud objections
of four countries: Czech
Republic, Romania, Hungary and
Slovakia,
whose foreign minister
blasted the plan.
ROBERT FICO, Slovakian Prime
Minister (through translator):
Slovakia will file a legal
complaint
against mandatory redistribution
of refugees. We will not
implement these decisions of the
interior ministers, because the
quotas are meaningless. The
system will not work and
Slovakia will not be
forced to adopt quotas.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The European
Union plan to resettle 120,000
migrants has been criticized
by the U.N. Refugee Agency, the
UNHCR. A spokeswoman said the
relocation plan was just not
sufficient
to resolve the crisis. She
complained that it was only
120,000 spread over two years.
And considering that, as of
today, 480,000 people had
arrived in Europe by boat, the
numbers were clearly not
sufficient. She said the E.U.
states would have to revise
those
figures upwards and
resettle more.
In order to pacify reluctant
European nations, the commission
president is reportedly
promising
measures to speed up the
deportation of failed asylum
seekers. So many of these people
in
Victoria Square could have paid
a fortune and risked their lives
for nothing.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Athens.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We take a
closer look at Europe's approach
to the crisis with William
Swing, director-general of the
International Organization for
Migration and former U.S.
diplomat, and David O'Sullivan,
the European Union's ambassador
to Washington.
Ambassador O'Sullivan, I
want to start with you.
What's happening in Europe right
now seems a tension between
sovereignty and solidarity.
You have got countries like
Hungary, Romania, the Czech
Republic and Slovakia saying
that
this idea to distribute 120,000
migrants across their countries
undermines their independence.
DAVID O'SULLIVAN, European Union
Ambassador to the United States:
Well, we are having
a healthy discussion, as we
often do in Europe, about how to
deal with this particular
crisis.
This is a global crisis. Europe
and a number of our member
states find themselves at the
sharp end of one aspect of it,
which is the sudden increase in
asylum seekers arriving
initially through the
Mediterranean and now by land.
We are having to cope with this,
find ways of taking the pressure
off those front-line member
states. There was an important
decision taken yesterday.
Of course, this is not easy for
some of our member states. But I
would like to emphasize
what Europe has been doing in
terms of addressing the problem
in the Mediterranean with search
and rescue, nearly 122,000 lives
saved, with a naval effort to
try and break the smugglers
who are exploiting the people,
assistance to Italy and Greece
to help them cope with
this.
And, of course, we should not
lose sight of the fact that the
real problem lies elsewhere.
It lies in Syria and, of course,
it lies in the many millions of
people, instead of just
hundreds of thousands, who are
displaced living both in Syria
and in the neighboring countries
who have had to shoulder an
enormous burden. Europe is one
of the largest donors to those
countries to try and help them,
but we need to do more, all of
us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ambassador
Swing, what happens to people
when they are sent to countries
that have clearly said they
don't want these people there?
WILLIAM SWING, Director-General,
International Organization for
Migration: Well, as Ambassador
O'Sullivan was mentioning, this
is an evolutionary process.
I think we are encouraged by the
evolution of Europe's policy,
particularly since April
of last year, when the emphasis
became that of saving life, the
increase of the number
of ships out trying to do search
and rescue, and then the big
decision yesterday on the
100 and -- bringing the number
of relocations up to 160,000.
It's a long way to go. And this
is really the short-term aspect
of the policy. Europe
is still trying to pursue a very
elusive objective of a common
migration and asylum policy, so
a good deal way to go there.
But we also need to keep it in
perspective. We're at 480,000
now, I think, who have come
into Europe, into the E.U. But
we also need to remember that
countries like Ethiopia,
700,000 refugees, Kenya 400,000,
Sudan 200,000. And little
Lebanon, with five million
inhabitants,
has more than a million
they're hosting.
So, we need to keep it in
perspective. It's really not so
much a problem to be solved,
as a human reality that has to
be managed by sensible people.
And we're very pleased
to see that so many of the
European Union states did agree
now to the formula of 120,000
-- 160,000.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ambassador
O'Sullivan, as you mentioned
earlier and as Ambassador Swing
just mentioned, what about the
rest of those populations? I
mean, 120,000 sounds like a
big number, but 80 percent to 90
percent of even just the Syrian
refugees are sitting
in Turkey, in Jordan, in
Lebanon. Right now, when they
look at their TVs and they see
this
opportunity to come to Europe,
this might be the time for them.
DAVID O'SULLIVAN: Well, I think
that, indeed, the situation of
those displace people is
-- has to be our top priority.
But the fact is that the
international agencies, UNHCR
and the World Food Program in
particular,
have basically run out of money.
The European Union has announced
today its intention to
increase even beyond the four
billion that we have been giving
until now. And the United
States is also a major donor in
the area. We need to do more.
We're calling on the
international
community to step up and give
more money to the Food Program,
to the UNHCR.
We have created a trust fund for
Syria which we hope other
countries will contribute to.
We put $1.8 billion into a trust
fund for Africa to help with the
countries that Ambassador
Swing was talking about, because
sub-Saharan Africa is also a
potential crisis point.
So, yes, this is a global
crisis. And Europe is
experiencing the consequences of
it in
one way, but we shouldn't lose
sight of the fact that we really
do need to create conditions
to help Lebanon, Jordan and
Turkey in particular give the
people who are there decent
food,
shelter, medical care and so
forth, while we try to solve the
political problem in Syria,
which would hopefully enable as
many people as possible to come
home.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And,
Ambassador O'Sullivan, staying
with you just for a second, is
this
threatening the very notion of
the Schengen area, the 22
countries that now allow free
travel between them, when you
see one country deciding to put
up barbed wire fence, another
country starting to ask
for passport controls?
DAVID O'SULLIVAN: No,
it's not at all.
The free movement within Europe
is one of our great
achievements. Of course, in a
moment
of crisis and a moment of great
difficulty, coping with large
numbers of asylum seekers,
temporary controls can be
reintroduced, but the commission
today called for these to be
progressively dismantled as we
try to put in place the means to
help member states deal
with this situation, including
helping them process all of the
applications, because these
people, once they look for
asylum, there is a quite complex
legal process which has to
be followed, which is
quite labor-intensive.
And we are proposing to help the
member states who are challenged
in this way to process
these people correctly and to
make sure that they are kept in
the best conditions possible
during that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ambassador
Swing, what about the notion
that many of these countries
have
is, listen, security concerns,
economic concerns, political
concerns before letting
thousands
or hundreds of thousands
of people in?
WILLIAM SWING: There is no
question that a lot of the
policies today are being driven
by an unprecedented anti-migrant
sentiment afoot in the world,
not just in Europe, but
in other countries.
It's driven by the fears of the
2008-2009 economic downturn,
when perhaps one's going
to lose one's job. It's driven
by the 9/11 -- the post-9/11
security syndrome, where
people are afraid, obviously,
of terrorists coming in.
It's also driven by a sense of
the loss of personal or national
identity. And I think,
with all of these, there are
ways to address this. These are
stereotypes that don't really
meet the reality that,
historically, migration has
always been overwhelmingly
positive. And
we need to get back to a
positive narrative in the
public, rather than the toxic
narrative
that we have now.
And to do this, we're going to
have to help everyone to learn
to manage inexorably growing
cultural, ethnic, religious
diversity within our countries.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Ambassador Swing and Ambassador
O'Sullivan, thanks so much
for joining us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congress is
exactly one week away from
another funding deadline and
another
possible government shutdown.
But with the pope's visit this
week, lawmakers will not get
back to the contentious issue
of funding Planned Parenthood
until late tomorrow. How that is
resolved will determined whether
a shutdown takes place.
For the very latest, I'm joined
by our political director, Lisa
Desjardins.
So, Lisa, given this debate
about Planned Parenthood that's
been going on for weeks
and weeks, where does
everything stand right now?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think, for
all of the heated debate and
important topics here, right
now,
Judy, it comes down
to the calendar.
So, let me take people through
where we are right now. First of
all, the deadline that
matters is September 30. That is
the deadline by which Congress
needs to fund most of
government.
Now, of course, here we are.
Tomorrow, we have that vote you
mentioned in the Senate.
That is a vote in which the
Senate will vote on a bill that
would defund Planned Parenthood,
but fund everything else in
government. It's expected to
fail.
So, what then?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because they need
60 votes, the way the Senate
works, and they can't get
the 60.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
Republicans don't have 60 votes.
So, even though most
Republicans will vote for that,
it's not expected to get the 60
votes that is needed.
So, that will leave an opening.
How does Congress fund
government? And that will leave
these
three days, next Monday, Tuesday
and Wednesday, in order for
Congress to figure that out,
not a lot of time and not a lot
of space in order to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But now the real
threat, as you and I were
talking earlier, is in the
House, where you have this very
determined group of Republicans
saying, no matter what,
they're not going to vote
to fund Planned Parenthood.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
The House Freedom Caucus, about
30 members, has said no way will
they vote for anything
that funds Planned Parenthood,
which is what may be ending --
may come out of the Senate.
It may be one of the only
options from the Senate. They
say they won't vote for it. That
means that Speaker Boehner
probably doesn't have enough
Republican votes to pass it with
just Republicans.
Beyond that caucus, there's
other Republicans who are on the
fence as well. They see this
as a moral vote. So, you do the
math, as our viewers are
probably doing right now, it's
obvious that Republicans will
need Democrats in order to fund
government at this point.
And it's not clear exactly
what the plan is.
That's why the concern now.
There's not a clear plan for how
they get out of this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two quick
questions. Speaker Boehner, is
it known where he stands on
whether
a government shutdown is
the right thing to do?
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes, Speaker
Boehner and everyone around him
has said, clearly, no,
we do not want a
government shutdown.
That's been his mantra. However,
how he avoids one is another
question. I just got off the
phone with a veteran member of
Congress who said no one in
leadership in the House or
Senate wants a shutdown.
However, his words, accidents do
happen.
And that's how they look at
2013. The dynamics then, Judy,
very similar to now. There was
a caucus I called the no way
caucus. It dug in, wouldn't a
support a funding bill that
funded then the
Affordable Care Act.
That same caucus now saying it
won't support anything that
funds Planned Parenthood.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just finally,
on the Democrats, if they are
called on to make the difference
here, what are they going to do?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
The Democrats, in a way, Nancy
Pelosi, are a little in the
catbird's seat, because Speaker
Boehner may need them to keep
government running, doesn't want
the blowback that they received
last time from the shutdown.
Democrats are interested in a
few things. They would like to
see the Export-Import Bank
reestablished, reauthorized. I
don't know if they will get it,
but that's something
that they would like on the
table as these discussions go
forward.
But, again, no one really knows,
Judy, what's going to happen.
Very possible they do another
short-term, but very possible
accidents can happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's why you and
others are going to be watching
it so closely.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
It's fascinating.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa
Desjardins, thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
new book explores whether
Putin's actions in Ukraine are
setting
up a new Cold War; and
remembering Yogi Berra for what
he did and said.
But, first, tomorrow Pope
Francis heads to Capitol Hill,
where he will address a joint
meeting of Congress. The pontiff
will speak from the same podium
where the House chaplain,
Father Patrick Conroy, delivers
the opening prayer every
morning.
Conroy is a Catholic priest and
a Jesuit who has served as the
chaplain for both Georgetown
University and Seattle
University, and most recently
taught high school students,
before
coming to Washington, D.C.
Gwen sat down with Father Pat,
as he is affectionately known,
to talk about the pope's visit
to Capitol
Hill and the interesting
flock he tends.
GWEN IFILL: Father Pat, thank
you so much for joining us.
So, here you are on Capitol
Hill. The pope, the big boss, is
arriving. Is that exciting?
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY, Chaplain
of the House of Representatives:
Well, I imagine the pope's
coming is exciting for any
Catholic. His coming is exciting
for me, although I'm not all
that
anxious about it, because I know
that I'm going to get to meet
him.
And it will be the first time
that I have will met a pope in
my lifetime. And so it's
a great blessing to me and kind
of, you know, how did this
happen that I actually get to
greet him here at the Capitol.
GWEN IFILL: As the Catholic
chaplain of the House of
Representatives, the opportunity
to greet Pope Francis, does it
carry a special weight? Does it
make you a much more popular
guy than you were a
couple of weeks ago?
(LAUGHTER)
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY:
Wouldn't that be nice?
(LAUGHTER)
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: I don't
know that it makes me more
popular.
Most of the questions that -- at
least around here, that came my
way was when he was elected.
You know, this guy's a Jesuit.
What I would like to point out
is, all Jesuits at some
point in their training have to
teach high school students. And
I think it's been noticeable
with Pope Francis that, when he
says things, it's like people
are like, for the first time
say, geez, I can understand this
guy. I understand what he's
saying.
And because of that, a lot of
people think he's been saying a
lot of new things. And,
of course, what a lot of the
commentators would tell, if you
have been following it
at all, is that he hasn't been
saying a lot of new things.
GWEN IFILL: But there's
been different emphasis.
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: There
has been that. There's no doubt
about that.
But when he talks about -- for
example, he talks about the
economy needs to be in service
to people, you know, not to
stock options, not to
corporation earnings, but needs
to
be in service to people, that is
longstanding Catholic teaching.
GWEN IFILL: You make
an interesting point.
Doctrinally, he's the same
as any previous pope.
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: He's the pope, after
all. But people are reading him
differently. They're
reading him as more accessible,
as more concerned about social
justice.
Is that a correct reading?
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: Yes.
The perceiving part is actually
true. The previous popes were
also concerned about social
justice. It was just that their
way of communicating it was
usually in more church talk and
church
language and reference to church
documents, which most people
know nothing about.
And so, when Pope Francis talks,
he's talking about the poor as
he personally has known
them throughout his entire
ministry in Latin America.
GWEN IFILL: As a spiritual
resource for a Congress which
doesn't always get along...
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: Always?
GWEN IFILL: Always,
ever get along.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Does that make your
job really difficult or do you
just see through it?
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: Well,
no, that's what the job is, I
guess, you know?
In an odd way, most of my Jesuit
life has prepared me to be here.
As a campus minister,
I was working with student
populations that were arguably
plurality, if not majority
Catholic.
But I was working with all
students. So my coming here and
working with a diverse
population
is what I have been doing most
of my ministerial life anyway.
And so that hasn't been hard.
GWEN IFILL: Except this
community is severely polarized.
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY:
Well, that's true.
Here's the thing that would have
been difficult. And I have found
this difficult when I have
slipped into it, is thinking
that my ministry was to fix or
heal that polarization.
GWEN IFILL: It's not?
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: Well,
certainly, one hopes that my
presence and influence could
do that.
But if I were thinking that
that's what my job were, I would
be in therapy, deep therapy,
now and maybe not even here. But
when I understand or when -- the
way I have chosen to see this
is that my job is to pray every
day for a miracle, to ask God to
work a miracle here.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's put this
in the context of the pope's
visit.
The pope's visit, does it
provide an opportunity for that
miracle, or access to that
miracle,
some sort of unity?
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY: Pope
Francis is a remarkably
attractive individual. And I
have
had, actually, a number of
non-Catholic and even
non-Christian people say this to
me.
He makes me want to be a better
person, or he makes me want to
be a better Christian,
or he makes me want to be a
better Jew or some -- so, there
is something about the pope's
authenticity that people
seem to be responding to.
This isn't message. This
is, like, authenticity.
GWEN IFILL: A prayer for
authenticity, I like that whole
idea, Father Pat Conroy.
Thank you very much
for talking to us.
REV. PATRICK J. CONROY:
You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: another
addition to the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
In march of 2014, Russia annexed
the Ukrainian territory of
Crimea. In the last
year-and-a-half,
Russia also has encouraged and
supported militarily separatists
in Eastern Ukraine.
The motivations behind these
actions, as well as the response
of the West, particularly
the United States, is the focus
of a new book by veteran
diplomatic correspondent Marvin
Kalb, "Imperial Gamble: Putin,
Ukraine and the New Cold War."
He spoke with Margaret Warner.
MARGARET WARNER:
Marvin Kalb, welcome.
MARVIN KALB, Author, "Imperial
Gamble: Putin, Ukraine and the
New Cold War": Thank you.
MARGARET WARNER: Now, in this
book, you say Putin has won his
gamble. You also recently
wrote, Putin has won Ukraine.
Is that where we are?
MARVIN KALB: I think that what
he has done from the very
beginning was have a far more
limited goal in mind than what a
number of people felt at the
very beginning, when this
all started.
He never wanted all of Ukraine.
He wanted for historical
purposes to take Crimea. He
did. Then he wanted a part of
Ukraine that he could always use
to advance Russian interests.
And he is now at a point where
nobody in the West is shouting,
hey, stop. Give us back
Crimea. It's all accepted.
And so he has won.
MARGARET WARNER: And you write
that the U.S. and the West
grossly miscalculated, have even
been shocked that he made this
play for Crimea, violated
international borders.
MARVIN KALB: There is no
question he violated the
borders. There is no question
he's used
to getting his way.
We had in the West a very
romantic vision of Russia back
in 1991, when the Soviet Union
died and whatever is Russia
began to emerge. And we began to
think of it as a democracy.
We're going to bring it into the
West. All is going to be
wonderful.
That was never in the cards.
MARGARET WARNER: So what was at
the root of this for Vladimir
Putin himself, in his spirit
and in his world view?
MARVIN KALB: Vladimir Putin is a
Russian czar. He's kind of a mix
of Peter the Great and
Stalin. He's got both in his
veins. And he looks out first
and foremost for the national
security interests of Russia. He
accepts that, in Eastern Europe,
that is a Russian backyard,
that is a Russian sphere of
influence. Ukraine lives most
uncomfortably and unhappily in
a Russian backyard.
If anything good is going to
emerge out of this, it's going
to be the result of an
acceptable
modus vivendi between Ukraine
and Russia. The two of them will
have to get together
at some point. It is going to be
a result that many people in the
West will not like,
because Russia, as the bigger
power, is going to get the
better of the deal. So, a lot of
people will say, that's
appeasement. That's this -- that
-- it's reality.
MARGARET WARNER: Sounds it like
you're speaking to the West and
to the United States when
you say things like that.
MARVIN KALB: Very much so.
MARGARET WARNER: And that the
U.S. should, what, step back and
let Ukraine fend for itself
with Russia now, settle
it among themselves?
MARVIN KALB: Every nation at the
end of the day must fend for
itself.
Sometimes, it needs help. And
Ukraine deserves all the help in
the world. I'm very sympathetic.
But I'm also a realist. I think
President Obama would love to
help. I think Chancellor
Merkel of Germany
would love to help.
But there are realities
governing what they can do. And
Ukraine cannot live with the
false
image that somehow or another
the West will come and rescue
her. It's not going to happen.
MARGARET WARNER: Go back to
Vladimir Putin. There was one
interesting point I thought
you made in the book,
is that he is...
MARVIN KALB: Just one?
MARGARET WARNER: Many.
(LAUGHTER)
MARGARET WARNER: The key is
really, he didn't just spring
out of nowhere, but he's very
much in the tradition of many
Russian leaders, not just Peter
the Great and Stalin. What
do you mean by that?
MARVIN KALB: He was the man in
the Kremlin at the moment. He
feels a personal responsibility
to reconstitute Russia in his
image, which is that of a czar,
which is that of a nation
that has an empire.
Russia can never be an empire
unless it is in control of
Ukraine.
MARGARET WARNER: And that has to
do with the very close
historical ties between the
two...
MARVIN KALB: Exactly.
MARGARET WARNER: ... which we in
the West also didn't really
grasp.
MARVIN KALB: Well, we have got
to understand, for example,
Russia is an orthodox Christian
nation. So is Ukraine.
That happened in 988 in Crimea,
a place called Kievan Rus, which
was the Russia around Kiev
at that time. It's 1,000 years
ago, but, to a Russian, it's
yesterday.
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
Let me ask you finally about a
phrase that you use in your
subtitle, and you call it
"The New Col~ War."
MARVIN KALB: Yes.
MARGARET WARNER: In terms of the
broader relationship between the
West and Russia, is it really
that dire?
MARVIN KALB: It is not the same
as a cold war, and I didn't in
the subtitle have the
ability to stretch it out.
But I was trying in the book to
say that we are dealing with a
return to what might be
a far more normal relationship
between the West and Russia.
Russia is what it is that
we see. It's not dressed up in
its birthday costume. It is what
it is. It regards its
national interests as important
enough to fight for.
And the difference on the whole
Ukraine situation is that the
Russians are prepared to fight
for their position on
Ukraine, and the West is not.
MARGARET WARNER: So, finally
ending back up with Putin yet
again, if this scenario you
stretched out, which would be
Ukraine and Russia getting
together and finding this modus
vivendi, if that doesn't happen
any time soon, what should we --
what do you expect next
from Putin?
MARVIN KALB: That's
a rough question.
He is so totally unpredictable.
The answer -- and it's not
ducking -- the answer is that
which satisfies the immediate
national security interests of
Russia.
MARGARET WARNER: As he sees it?
MARVIN KALB: As he sees it. And
he is a despot, and he's a very
good despot. And he will see
things in a narrow way. What is
good for Russia? That is what he
will do. If that's represented
by a move toward the Baltic,
that would be very dangerous,
but he would do it, on the
assumption that he would ask
himself the question: I am
prepared to fight for Estonia.
Is the
United States? Is Germany?
Is Britain, France?
And the answer in his mind would
be no. That doesn't mean he's
going to do that.
MARGARET WARNER: But it's all
thoughts in his head perhaps.
MARVIN KALB: It's very
much up in the air.
MARGARET WARNER: Marvin Kalb,
author of "Imperial Gamble,"
thank you so much.
MARVIN KALB: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
the passing of a baseball great
and beloved American character,
Yogi Berra, who died
yesterday at the age of 90.
Yogi, as he was universally
known, first joined the New York
Yankees as a catcher in 1946,
where he became a linchpin on 10
World Series-winning teams.
Later, as team manager, he led
both
the Yankees and the New York
Mets to league championships. He
was also famous for his
knack for the oddly
turned phrase.
For more on his life and legacy,
I am joined by one of Berra's
biographers, Allen Barra,
author of "Yogi Berra:
Eternal Yankee."
Allen Barra, welcome.
Let's talk first about Yogi
Berra the baseball player. What
made him a standout?
ALLEN BARRA, Author, "Yogi
Berra: Eternal Yankee": Well,
it's hard to say.
Yogi was tremendously talented,
but he certainly didn't look it.
He was stumpy. He was 5'8'',
didn't look like he had an
athlete's body. The first time
Ted Williams, you know, who
was the John Wayne of baseball,
towering, imposing figure,
6'4'', stands up to the plate
and looks down, and there is
this little, ungainly guy, none
of the equipment fit -- the
chest protector, shin
guards, nothing fits.
Yogi looks up at him and says,
"How you doing?" And Ted just
says to himself, "Who are they
trying to fool with
this blank-blank guy?"
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he led...
ALLEN BARRA: And Ted Williams
turned out to be one of the
biggest fans. He loved Yogi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he led the
Yankees in, I read, runs batted
in for seve~ consecutive
seasons?
ALLEN BARRA: Yogi was a 14-time
All-Star. He was a terrific
hitter who never struck
out. He had an incredible
batting eye. His hand-eye
coordination was outstanding.
And
in that little 5'8'' body, he
was compact and powerful, and
almost impossible to strike
out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you told us
that -- you said to us today,
you said he was the most
beloved American athlete, with
the possible exception of Babe
Ruth. What made him so beloved?
ALLEN BARRA: Yogi was loyal. He
was friendly. He was a great
American winner.
I mean, any coach or player you
talk about who won a lot of
championships, won a lot
of games, Yogi's got to be on
that list. As you said, 14
pennants, 10 World Series. And
yet the thing that separates
Yogi, I think, from all other
great American winners in
sports,
Yogi always seemed to be
playing. He seemed to love
playing the game.
There is probably no one that
had -- enjoyed the game more,
had more relish out of playing
it. And I think that got passed
on to everybody. His opponents
loved him. His manager loved
him. Sportswriters loved him
because he was great copy. He
would say almost anything,
and they could -- and if it
wasn't altogether usable, let's
say they could just rewrite
it until it was.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where did that
come from, the Yogisms? "If you
come to a fork in the road,
take it." Where do
those lines come from?
ALLEN BARRA: There's two kind of
Yogisms, basically. There's --
well, I would say three
kinds.
There's the Yogisms, the things
that he said that he didn't say.
And then there's the
malapropisms,
like when the -- Yogi Berra Day
in Saint Louis in 1947, he says:
"I would like to thank everyone
for making this day necessary."
That was just a slip-up.
(LAUGHTER)
ALLEN BARRA: Then there are the
Yogisms that make a lot of sense
if you think about it.
Now, you just cited one, one of
the -- I think one of the best,
one of my favorites. He said,
"When you come to the fork
in the road, take it."
What did he mean? He was telling
a reporter how to get to his
house. He was in a cul-de-sac.
He meant, no matter which way
you go, you're going to be
there.
That was just a great way of
saying it. I think almost
anything Yogi said like that,
he would say it in fewer words
and get to the point quicker
than just about anything
who -- anyone who voiced
a similar sentiment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, I read that
the cartoon character Yogi Bear,
who came out...
ALLEN BARRA: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... I guess in
the late '50s, was named after
Yogi Berra, but Yogi Berra
didn't like that.
ALLEN BARRA: I asked
him about that once.
And he said -- he says, "I'm not
saying I don't like the bear."
He said, "The bear's
OK." But he didn't like the idea
that people would think of him
as a cartoon character.
He wanted to be taken seriously.
Most of the things that he said
that people laughed at were just
things that were said
in the clubhouse, said to
reporters. He wanted to talk to
people. He wasn't like a lot of
athletes today that were afraid
to talk to reporters and didn't
know what was going to
come of that, how they
were going to be quoted.
Yogi would take his chances. He
would talk about just about
anything. And you have to
remember, too, since the Yankees
won almost every year back then,
they were usually in
a good mood, and Yogi was in
a good mood to talk. So...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he was
somebody I think everybody
thought they knew.
Allen Barra, biography of
Yogi Berra, we thank you.
ALLEN BARRA: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Every summer,
middle and high school teachers
from around the country travel
here to Washington, D.C., for
the Student Reporting Labs
teacher boot camp, in order
to better understand what
teaching broadcast journalism
will look like in their
classrooms.
The educators shoot and
edit character profiles.
Tonight, we discover a young man
who fights the demons in life
through meditation and
the kind of high-flying
acrobatics seen in video games.
It's an art form known as
tricking.
The video was shot and edited by
teachers from Miami, Detroit and
Aurora, Colorado.
WILLIAM-THOMAS CONEYS, Mixed
Martial Artist/Trainer:
Tricking, to me, it's a lot of
things. Mainly,
it's a lifesaver.
I was picked on as a kid from
elementary up until the middle
of high school. I really
didn't have too many friends.
Around the age of 15, 16, I lost
my grandfather and my brother
two months apart in the same
year. And that sent me into a
very, very sad, like, dark
place for me. I just wouldn't
talk to anybody. I was fed up
with a lot of things.
A couple of months afterwards,
my mom put me into martial arts
classes because she wanted
me to be somewhere where I could
express that freely without
hurting myself or getting into
trouble.
Tricking is an artistic movement
that spawned from the roots in
martial arts, takes its
form from gymnastics, dance,
martial arts, and just about
anything that you really can
think of. We have taken video
game moves and turned them into
tricks.
I'm an athlete. And just,
physically from what we do, it's
demanding, you know? And
when it comes to tricking by
itself, it's an art form,
because it has structure, but
no structure. When you trick,
you paint the images in your
head, sometimes before,
sometimes
after, sometimes while you're
in the middle in the air.
The biggest injury I had was
when I crashed on my neck, and I
got up, thought I was fine,
walked about 10 feet, and then I
was out cold. The doctor said
that, had I been any higher
in the air, I probably could
have paralyzed myself from the
neck down.
You know, for me, tricking, it's
a part of who I am as a person
now. You know, not a
day goes by where I don't think
-- where I don't think about
tricking. Like, I know at
a certain point, I'm probably
going to have to sit down,
someday. But, until then, I will
be tricking.
And even then, when I do have to
stop, I will be teaching others
how to trick or at least
being able to give my knowledge
on it to them. You know,
tricking, for me, it's not just
something that I do. It's a way
of life. And I have come close
to giving up on it a lot,
just with injuries and other
stuff that. But, at the end of
the day, I always go back to
it, because that's the one thing
that keeps me going throughout
everything.
You know, bad days, good days,
sad times, happy times, I can
always count on tricking
to give me that edge of peace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: once a scientist, always
a scientist. And Pope
Francis was once a chemist. His
recent statements on climate
change have been applauded by
many
fellow scientists, but for
others, the pope's policy stops
short of addressing one major
contributor to global
warming: population growth.
You can read our full story on
Pope Francis' climate legacy on
our home page.
And we have a review of the new
movie "Stonewall" from a man who
participated in the 1969 riots
that set off a wave of LGBT
activism. He says the film gets
it all wrong. Read his take
on our Arts page.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. On Thursday -- that's
tomorrow. We will be back.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.